Lesson 2 (#1837)
kframework/k: k-distribution/k-tutorial/1_basic/02_basics/README.md

# Lesson 1.2: Basics of Functional K

The purpose of this lesson is to explain the basics of **productions** and
**rules** in K. These are two types of K **sentences**. A K file consists of
one or more **requires** or **modules** in K. Each module consists of one or
more **imports** or sentences. For more information on requires, modules, and
sentences, refer to [Lesson 4](../04_modules/README.md). However, for the time
being, just think of a module as a container for sentences, and don't worry
about requires or imports just yet.

## Our first K program

> To start with, input the following program into your editor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start with, input the following program into your editor as file `lesson-02-a.k`:
```

```k
module LESSON-02-A

  syntax Color ::= Yellow() | Blue()
  syntax Fruit ::= Banana() | Blueberry()
  syntax Color ::= colorOf(Fruit) [function]

  rule colorOf(Banana()) => Yellow()
  rule colorOf(Blueberry()) => Blue()

endmodule
```

Save this file as `lesson-02-a.k` and then run:

```
kompile lesson-02-a.k
```

`kompile` is K's compiler. By default, it takes a program or specification
written in K and compiles it into an interpreter for that input. Right now
we are compiling a single file. A set of K files that are compiled together
are called a **K definition**. We will cover multiple file K definitions later
on. `kompile` will output a directory containing everything needed to execute
programs using or perform proofs about that definition. In this case, the 
directory `kompile` will create by default will be in the current directory
and will be called `lesson-02-a-kompiled`.

> Now, save the following input file in your editor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, save the following input file in your editor as `banana.color` in the same directory as `lesson-02-a.k`:
```

```
colorOf(Banana())
```

> You can call it whatever file name you want, but for example purposes we will
> call this file `banana.color`. Save it in the same directory that also contains
> the `lesson-02-a-kompiled` directory.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We can now evaluate this K term by running:

```
krun banana.color
```

> From that directory. `krun` will invoke K's interpreter by interpreting a
> program according to the definition that was compiled in that directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the same directory. `krun` will use the interpreter generated by the
first call to `kompile` to execute this program.
```

  syntax Color ::= Yellow()
  syntax Color ::= Blue()
  syntax Fruit ::= Banana()
  syntax Fruit ::= Blueberry()
  syntax Color ::= colorOf(Fruit) [function]

  rule colorOf(Banana()) => Yellow()
  rule colorOf(Blueberry()) => Blue()

endmodule
```

Or even:

```k
module LESSON-02-C

  syntax Color ::= Yellow()
                 | Blue()
                 | colorOf(Fruit) [function]
  syntax Fruit ::= Banana()
                 | Blueberry()

  rule colorOf(Banana()) => Yellow()
  rule colorOf(Blueberry()) => Blue()

endmodule
```

Each of these types of productions named above has the same underlying syntax,
but context and **attributes** are used to distinguish between the different
types. Tokens, brackets, lists, macros, aliases, and anywhere productions will
be covered in a later lesson, but this lesson does introduce us to constructors
and functions. `Yellow()`, `Blue()`, `Banana()`, and `Blueberry()` are
constructors. You can think of a constructor like a constructor for an
algebraic data type, if you're familiar with a functional language. The data
type itself is the sort that appears on the left of the `::=` operator. Sorts
in K consist of uppercase identifiers.

> Constructors can have arguments, but these constructors do not have any
> arguments. We will cover the syntax of productions in detail in the next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constructors can have arguments, but these ones do not. We will cover the syntax of productions in detail in the next
```

lesson, but for now, you can write a production with no arguments as an

> uppercase or lowercase identifier followed by the `()` operator. You can write
> a production with arguments by putting the sorts of the arguments in a
> comma-separated list inside the parentheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uppercase or lowercase identifier followed by the `()` operator.
```

Don't explain things that are not introduced yet. In fact, I wouldn't even mention that you can have `alias`, `macro`, etc... other types of declarations, you can just say "these are _some_ of the types of productions you can define".

The point being that anything explained that _is not immediately used_ is just confusing to the user. The basic rules of writing lessons are (i) don't explain anything that is not immediately useful for the lesson, and (ii) make sure you do explain _everything_ that is needed for the lesson.

future lessons, but for now, you can think of a rule as consisting of a 
**left-hand side** and a **right-hand side**, separated by the rewrite
operator. On the left-hand side is the name of the function and zero or more
**patterns**. On the right-hand side is another pattern. The meaning of the
rule is relatively simple, having defined these components. If the function
is called with arguments that **match** the patterns on the left-hand side,
then the return value of the function is the pattern on the right-hand side.

For example, in the above example, if the argument of the `colorOf` function
is `Banana()`, then the return value of the function is `Yellow()`.

So far we have introduced that a constructor is a type of pattern in K. We
will introduce more complex patterns in later lessons, but there is one other
type of basic pattern: the **variable**. A variable, syntactically, consists
of an uppercase identifier. However, unlike a constructor, a variable will
match **any** pattern with one exception: Two variables with the same name
must match the same pattern.

Here is a more complex example:

```k
module LESSON-02-D

>   syntax Container ::= Jar(Fruit)

Reviewer: Make sure you mention, explicitly here, that `Jar(_)` is now a *constructor* which takes a single *argument*. Above I mention not to introduce multi-argument constructor explanation until they are introduced, so you should move that text I had you delete to down here instead. You should say "this is a single-argument constructor, but you can have multi-argument constructors by adding multiple sorts separated by commas".

  syntax Fruit ::= Apple() | Pear()

  syntax Fruit ::= contentsOfJar(Container) [function]

  rule contentsOfJar(Jar(F)) => F

endmodule
```

In this example, `F` is a variable. It will match both `Apple()` and `Pear()`.
The return value of the function is created by **substituting** the matched
values of all of the variables into the variables on the right-hand side of
the rule.

To demonstrate, compile this definition and execute the following program with
krun:

```
contentsOfJar(Jar(Apple()))
```

You will see when you run it that the program returns `Apple()`, because that
is the pattern that was matched to `F`.

## Exercises

> 1. Extend the definition in lesson-02-a.k with the addition of blackberries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Extend the definition in `lesson-02-a.k` with the addition of blackberries
```

   and kiwis. For simplicity, blackberries are black and kiwis are green. Then
   compile your definition and test that your additional fruits are correctly
   handled by the `colorOf` function.
2. Create a new definition which defines an outfit as a hat, shirt, pants, and

>    shoes. Define a new sort, `Boolean`, with two constructors, true and false.

Reviewer: I think this is a big leap to make given the explanation above. At least say something to the effect of "An outfit will have to be a *multi-argument constuctor* containing a ...", to make sure they look at the correct parts of the explanation.

**rules** in K. These are two types of K **sentences**. A K file consists of
one or more **requires** or **modules** in K. Each module consists of one or
more **imports** or sentences. For more information on requires, modules, and
sentences, refer to [Lesson 4](../04_modules/README.md). However, for the time
being, just think of a module as a container for sentences, and don't worry
about requires or imports just yet.

## Our first K program

To start with, input the following program into your editor as file
`lesson-02-a.k`:

```k
module LESSON-02-A

  syntax Color ::= Yellow() | Blue()
  syntax Fruit ::= Banana() | Blueberry()
  syntax Color ::= colorOf(Fruit) [function]

  rule colorOf(Banana()) => Yellow()
  rule colorOf(Blueberry()) => Blue()

endmodule
```

Save this file and then run:

```
kompile lesson-02-a.k
```

`kompile` is K's compiler. By default, it takes a program or specification
written in K and compiles it into an interpreter for that input. Right now
we are compiling a single file. A set of K files that are compiled together
are called a **K definition**. We will cover multiple file K definitions later

> on. `kompile` will output a directory containing everything needed to execute
> programs using or perform proofs about that definition. In this case, the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on. `kompile` will output a directory containing everything needed to execute
programs or perform proofs using that definition. In this case, the 
```

directory `kompile` will create by default will be in the current directory
and will be called `lesson-02-a-kompiled`.

Now, save the following input file in your editor as `banana.color` in the
directory as `lesson-02-a.k`:

```
colorOf(Banana())
```

> We can now evaluate this K term by running:
> 
> ```
> krun banana.color
> ```
> 
> From the same directory. `krun` will use the interpreter generated by the first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now evaluate this K term by running (from the same directory):

```
krun banana.color
```

`krun` will use the interpreter generated by the first
```

  rule colorOf(Blueberry()) => Blue()

endmodule
```

Each of these types of productions named above has the same underlying syntax,
but context and **attributes** are used to distinguish between the different
types. Tokens, brackets, lists, macros, aliases, and anywhere productions will
be covered in a later lesson, but this lesson does introduce us to constructors
and functions. `Yellow()`, `Blue()`, `Banana()`, and `Blueberry()` are
constructors. You can think of a constructor like a constructor for an
algebraic data type, if you're familiar with a functional language. The data
type itself is the sort that appears on the left of the `::=` operator. Sorts
in K consist of uppercase identifiers.

Constructors can have arguments, but these ones do not. We will cover the
syntax of productions in detail in the next lesson, but for now, you can write
a production with no arguments as an uppercase or lowercase identifier followed
by the `()` operator.

A function is distinguished from a constructor by the presence of the
**function** attribute. Attributes appear in a comma separated list between
square brackets after any sentence, including both productions and rules.

> Various attributes with built-in meanings exist in K and will be discussed
> throughout the tutorial, but the user can also give any sentence a user-defined
> attribute using the same syntax by simply using an identifier for the attribute
> which is not reserved by K.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various attributes with built-in meanings exist in K and will be discussed
throughout the tutorial.
```

No need to mention user-defined attributes yet, not at least until they learn about syntax priorities. I would also like to minimize mention of this feature, as it's more controversial than other features (some would like to see it removed, including myself).

## Rules, Matching, and Variables

Functions in K are given definitions using rules. A rule begins with the `rule`
keyword and contains at least one **rewrite operator**. The rewrite operator
is represented by the syntax `=>`. The rewrite operator is one of the built-in
productions in K, and we will discuss in more detail how it can be used in
future lessons, but for now, you can think of a rule as consisting of a 
**left-hand side** and a **right-hand side**, separated by the rewrite
operator. On the left-hand side is the name of the function and zero or more

> **patterns**. On the right-hand side is another pattern. The meaning of the

Reviewer: I don't understand the "zero or more patterns". Isn't it just a single pattern on the LHS? Or do you mean the use of `#Or`?

Author: I'm referring to the arguments to the function. It's true that the entire term on the left hand side is itself a pattern, but this is going to be a confusing way of thinking about it for someone whose background is functional programming. If you have a better suggestion on how to phrase it, I'm all ears.

Reviewer: Ah OK, then I would just emphasize that the zero or more patterns are _arguments_ to the function.

```suggestion
operator. On the left-hand side is the name of the function and zero or more
**patterns** in the argument positions of the functions. On the right-hand side is another pattern. The meaning of the
```

is called with arguments that **match** the patterns on the left-hand side,
then the return value of the function is the pattern on the right-hand side.

For example, in the above example, if the argument of the `colorOf` function
is `Banana()`, then the return value of the function is `Yellow()`.

So far we have introduced that a constructor is a type of pattern in K. We
will introduce more complex patterns in later lessons, but there is one other
type of basic pattern: the **variable**. A variable, syntactically, consists
of an uppercase identifier. However, unlike a constructor, a variable will
match **any** pattern with one exception: Two variables with the same name
must match the same pattern.

Here is a more complex example:

```k
module LESSON-02-D

  syntax Container ::= Jar(Fruit)
  syntax Fruit ::= Apple() | Pear()

  syntax Fruit ::= contentsOfJar(Container) [function]

  rule contentsOfJar(Jar(F)) => F

endmodule
```

Here we see that `Jar` is a constructor with a single argument. You can write a
production with multiple arguments by putting the sorts of the arguments in a
comma-separated list inside the parentheses.

> In this example, `F` is a variable. It will match both `Apple()` and `Pear()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, `F` is a variable. It will match either `Apple()` or `Pear()`.
```

The return value of the function is created by **substituting** the matched
values of all of the variables into the variables on the right-hand side of
the rule.

To demonstrate, compile this definition and execute the following program with
krun:

```
contentsOfJar(Jar(Apple()))
```

You will see when you run it that the program returns `Apple()`, because that

> is the pattern that was matched to `F`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the pattern that was matched by `F`.
```

## Exercises

1. Extend the definition in `lesson-02-a.k` with the addition of blackberries
   and kiwis. For simplicity, blackberries are black and kiwis are green. Then
   compile your definition and test that your additional fruits are correctly
   handled by the `colorOf` function.
2. Create a new definition which defines an outfit as a multi-argument
   constructor consisting of a hat, shirt, pants, and shoes. Define a new sort,
   `Boolean`, with two constructors, true and false. Each of hat, shirt, pants,

>    and shoes will have a single argument, which is a color, either black or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and shoes will have a single argument (a color), either black or
```
